---
layout: post
date: 2023-12-26
title: "Post 5: Perverse Sheaves Part 2"
permalink: /post5.html
katex: true
order: 5
---

In this post, I will discuss more on categories, abelian categories, chain complexes, and the homotopy category of an abelian category.

This post is long as-is, so it won't have a "formal" section. Instead, that will take up the next post.

For experienced readers, I'm going to ignore set-theoretic issues (sorry ☹︎). Assume all categories are small or that we're working in a Grothendieck universe, or whatever else floats your boat.

---

# Categories

*Categories* are collections of objects and morphisms[^morph] between them. If $f$ is a morphism from object $A$ to object $B$, then we write $f:A\to B$. Whenever you have morphisms $f:A\to B$ and $g:B\to C$, you can *compose* them to get a morphism $g\circ f:A\to C$. Sometimes mathematicians get lazy and write $gf$ instead of $g\circ f$. Composition is required to satisfy two conditions:

1. $h\circ(g\circ f)=(h\circ g)\circ f$. In other words, composition is associative.

2. For every object $A$, there is an *identity* morphism $1_A$ from $A$ to $A$, such that $1_A\circ f = f$ and $g\circ 1_a=g$.

A morphism $f:A\to B$ is an *isomorphism* if it has an *inverse*, i.e. a morphism $g:B\to A$ such that $f\circ g = 1_B$ and $g\circ f = 1_A$.

[^morph]: Sometimes mathematicians say "map" or "arrow" instead of "morphism".

Some people might write $\text{ob}(\mc C)$ and $\text{mor}(\mc C)$ for the collections of objects and morphisms in $\mc C$, respectively. Then $A\in\text{ob}(\mc C)$ has a clear meaning: "$A$ is an object of $\mc C$". However, I will take another convention, and write $A\in\mc C$ to mean "$A$ is an object of $\mc C$". In many cases, the category one is working in is clear from context, so you might not even reference the category.

For objects $A$ and $B$ in category $\mc C$, we denote the set of morphisms from $A$ to $B$ by $\Hom_{\mc C}(A,B)$, or just $\Hom(A,B)$ if the category is clear from context.

Sometimes we say "category of \[objects\]" instead of saying, or at least "category of \[objects\] with these morphisms", instead of "category with these objects and these morphisms". Observe what I mean in the following examples:

- Set, the category of sets with morphisms being functions.

- Grp, the category of groups with morphisms being group homomorphisms.

- Top, the category of topological spaces with morphisms being continuous functions.

- $R$-mod, the category of (left) modules for a fixed ring $R$, with morphisms being $R$-linear functions.

It is important to note that not all categories can be thought of as consisting of "structures and structure-preserving functions between them",[^conc] even though all of the examples above are of this form.

[^conc]: These are known as concrete categories.

You might wonder if there is a category of categories. There is[^STIs], and the morphisms are called functors. We won't need these in this post, but I will provide the definition since it is fundamental and will be used in future posts.

A *functor* $F:\mc C\to \mc D$ does two things. It sends any object $A\in\mc C$ to an object $F(A)\in\mc C$, and any morphism $f:A\to B$ in $\mc C$ to a morphism $F(f):F(A)\to F(B)$ in $\mc D$. Furthermore, $F$ must preserve identity morphisms and composition:

[^STIs]: Again, I'm ignoring "set theoretic issue" or "size issues". Don't get mad at me.

1. $F(1\_A)=1\_{F(A)}$

2. $F(g\circ f)=F(g)\circ F(f).$

There is also a notion of "morphism" between functors[^NT], but we won't need that yet.

[^NT]: They are called *natural transformations*, and they are certainly important to know. They also lead into the notion of 2-categories.

# Abelian categories

The next step towards derived categories are *abelian categories*. Essentially, abelian categories are categories where one can "do homological algebra". For instance, you can define exact sequences and (left/right) exact functors, you can define chain complexes and their cohomology, and so on. It is fine if you haven't learned homological algebra before -- this is an introduction to the categorical side of it!

The most familiar[^MET] example of an abelian category is $R$-mod. The categories Grp and Top are not abelian.

[^MET]: In fact, this is in some sense the most universal example; look up the Freyd-Mitchell embedding theorem for a precise statement.

So, what is actually required for a category $\mc C$ to be abelian? Very roughly, you need the following:

1. It has a *zero object*, denoted $0$, with the property that for any $A\in\mc C$, there is only one morphism from $0$ to $A$ and only one morphism from $A$ to $0$. Note that there may be more than one zero object.[^zerouniqueness] The morphisms $0\to A$ and $A\to 0$ are also denoted by $0$.

2. You can "add" and "multiply" any finite number of objects to get a new object, and the results of addition and multiplication must be the same. This operation is typically denoted with $\oplus$.

3. Any morphism $f:A\to B$ has a "kernel" $k:K\to A$ and a "cokernel" $c:B\to C$, which are morphisms that are "universal with respect to the equations" $f\circ k=0$ and $c\circ f=0$. Often times, one just refers to the objects $K$ and $C$ as being the kernel and cokernel.

4. "Injective" morphisms are the kernel of some morphism, and "surjective" morphisms are the cokernel of some morphism.[^epimonic]

[^epimonic]: Injective and surjective are sometimes, but not always, the right notions here. Instead, they should be replaced by monic and epic morphisms, respectively. While it isn't too much work to just define monic and epic morphisms, I don't think it is necessary.

[^zerouniqueness]: Suppose you have two zero objects, $0_1$ and $0_2$. Then there is a *unique* isomorphism $0_1\to 0_2$. So zero objects are "unique up to unique isomorphism". We will always refer to a specific zero object guaranteed by the axioms by $0$, but we may say "a zero object" if we cannot guarantee that they are literally the same object.

Now, I've intentionally made axioms 2 through 4 pretty vague. The reason for this is essentially that we won't be using them explicitly, at least not to the extent that we really need to discuss the precise notions. For instance, you have *define* what a kernel and cokernel of a map of sheaves is, and they dont't really bear any resemblance to the abstract categorical definitions of kernel and cokernel.

As a consequence of the first axiom, any two objects $A,B$ have a unique *zero morphism* between them, also denoted $0$, defined by the composition $A\to0\to B$. As an exercise, show that $0\circ f = 0$ and $g\circ 0=0$, with $0$ standing for any zero morphism. Then, use this to show that if $1_A$ is the zero morphism $A\to 0\to A$, then $A$ is a zero object.

As a consequence of the first three axioms, you can "enrich"[^enrich] $\mc C$ so that you can *add* two morphisms $f,g:A\to B$ to get a new morphism $f+g:A\to B$. In fact, this makes $\Hom(A,B)$ into an abelian group. The $0$ morphism is the group identity, and the morphism $-f$ denotes the group inverse of $-f$. There is one other requirement for this to be an "enrichment", but we don't need it.

[^enrich]: There is a precise notion of an enriched category. One can argue that an enriched category is more than just a category that satisfies some extra "internal" conditions. For that reason, I strayed away from the typical route of first enriching and then adding extra conditions; the existence of an enrichment is a consequence of the other axioms. Furthermore, there is a canonical choice of enrichment here, in the sense that it interacts well with the other axioms.

You might be bogged down by all of the information so far. Take a break if you need to, but don't get discouraged!

# Chain complexes

Before I start this, a disclaimer: There are a lot of terms that start with the word "chain". Some people will often remove the word "chain", even from the term "chain complex"! I was trying not to do this, but I stopped trying at a certain point in writing. Sorry!

For any abelian category $\mc A$, one can form an abelian category $Ch(\mc A)$ of chain[^cochain] complexes. A chain complex is a "diagram" like this:

$$\cdots\xr{d^{-2}} A^{-1}\xr{d^{-1}} A^0\xr{d^0} A^1\xr{d^1}\cdots$$

The $A^i$ are objects in $\mc A$, and the *differentials* $d^i$ are required to satisfy $d^i\circ d^{i-1}=0$. One might denote a chain complex by $(A^\bullet, d^\bullet)$, or just $A^\bullet$, or even just $A$. I'll stick to $A^\bullet$ for the sweet spot between clarity and brevity. Furthermore, one might suppress the indices on the differentials, but I won't do that. If one is dealing with several chain complexes, then you might put a subscript on the differentials, i.e. $d^i_A$ for the differentials of $A^\bullet$.

A morphism of chain complexes is called a chain map. A *chain map* $f:A^\bullet \to B^\bullet$ is a collection of morphisms $f^i:A^i\to B^i$ that "commute" with the differentials: $d^i_B\circ f^i=f^{i+1}\circ d^i_A$. As an exercise, what is the identity morphism of a chain complex? What is the composition of two chain maps? $Ch(\mc A)$ is also abelian; what is the $0$ object and what are the $0$ morphisms?

[^cochain]: I'm going to be using the notation for what some might call **co**chain complexes. Sorry!

## Cohomology

An important part of a chain complex $A^\bullet$ is its cohomology. One could even argue that this is what mathematicians in this area care the most about.

The property $d^i\circ d^{i-1}=0$ can be thought of as saying $\im d^{i-1}\subset \ker d^i$, where im means image and ker means kernel. In other words, $d^{i-1}$ sends something to something that gets sent to $0$ by $d^i$. This doesn't strictly make sense in an arbitrary abelian category, but with a little work you can make it precise. If you are working in $R$-mod, then the image and kernel of morphisms are defined as usual, as is the quotient of a module by a submodule.

You can then define the quotient $(\ker d^i)/(\im d^{i-1})$, called the $i$*th cohomology* of $A^\bullet$, denoted by $H^i(A^\bullet)$. Note that this is an object of $\mc A$.

It turns out that chain maps $f:A^\bullet \to B^\bullet$ "induce" maps[^cohomfunctor] in cohomology, $H^i(f):H^i(A^\bullet)\to H^i(B^\bullet)$. This leads to a key component in defining derived categories: quasi-isomorphisms. A chain map $f$ is a *quasi-isomorphism* if $H^i(f)$ is an isomorphism for all $i$.

[^cohomfunctor]: In fact, $H^i$ is a functor from $Ch(\mc A)$ to $\mc A$.

## The homotopy category

In constructing the derived category of an abelian category $\mc A$, there is an optional step of constructing the homotopy category, denoted $K(\mc A)$. In fact, I probably won't even be exploiting the one reason[^tricat] I can think of for constructing this category. Nevertheless, it exists, and it is useful. The less experienced reader may feel free to skip this subsection.

[^tricat]: One can put the structure of a *triangulated category* on $K(\mc A)$, and the derived category inherits this structure. I may or may not discuss triangulated categories in later posts. Some people, like my advisor, might see this as almost sacrilegious, but for my goal of introducing perverse sheaves in the most accessible way possible, I don't think it is necessary.

There are two ways to construct $K(\mc A)$, but I will only fully discuss one of them. See this footnote[^lochtpeq] for a brief indication of the other one.

[^lochtpeq]: There is a notion of localization of categories with respect to a certain collection of morphisms. In fact, I will discuss localization for the derived category. Anyway, $K(\mc A)$ is the localization of $Ch(\mc A)$ with respect to homotopy equivalences.

Two chain maps $f,g:A^\bullet\to B^\bullet$ are said to be *chain homotopic* if there is a collection of morphisms $s^i:A^i\to B^{i-1}$ such that $f^i-g^i=d_B^{i-1}\circ s^i + s^{i+1}\circ d^i_A$. The collection of morphisms, sometimes denoted $s:f\to g$, is called a *chain homotopy*. If $f$ and $g$ are chain homotopic, we write $f\sim g$. Chain homotopy is an equivalence relation.

While the definition may seem opaque, it is a useful notion because of the following fact: homotopic maps induce the same maps in cohomology. However, it is **not** true that if two maps induce the same maps in cohomology, then they are homotopic. Try and find a counterexample! See this footnote[^cehint] for a starting hint and this footnote[^ceoutline] for an outline.

In any case, if we were to "identify" chain homotopic maps, i.e. treat $f$ and $g$ as "equal" if $f\sim g$, then we wouldn't lose information about induced maps in cohomology. This leads to the definition of the homotopy category.

We define the *homotopy category* $K(\mc A)$ as the category of chain complexes, where the morphisms are chain homotopy equivalence classes of chain maps.[^chainchainchain] If $f$ is chain map, one denotes the corresponding equivalence class by $[f]$, or sometimes just $f$; I will use the first notation. The identity morphisms in $K(\mc A)$ are the classes $[1_A]$. Composition is defined[^wd] as follows: $[g]\circ [f]=[g\circ f]$.

It is important to note that $K(\mc A)$ can fail to be abelian. I would say it is "usually" not abelian, with about 80% certainty.

[^cehint]: Consider the following chain complex $A^\bullet$ of abelian groups: $0\toZ\xr{\times 2}\Z\xr q\Z/2\Z\to 0$, where all the other objects are 0, $\times 2$ means the multiplication by $2$ map, and $q$ is the "mod $2$" map. Think about maps $A^\bullet\to A^\bullet$.

[^ceoutline]: First, what are the cohomology groups of $A^\bullet$? Consider the zero morphism and the identity morphism in $\Hom(A^\bullet,A^\bullet)$. Show that they induce the same maps in cohomology, but they are not homotopic. Thanks to jagr2808 on Discord for pointing this example out to me and correcting my original example.

A morphism in $K(\mc A)$ is called a quasi-isomorphism if one, and therefore[^wd2] all, of its representatives is a quasi-isomorphism.

[^wd2]: I previously mentioned that homotopic maps induce the same maps in cohomology. Can you figure out why you only need one representative to be a quasi-isomorphism? In other words, if $f\sim g$ and $f$ is a quasi-isomorphism, why is $g$ a quasi-isomorphism?

[^wd]: One needs to check that this is "well-defined", i,e. that it doesn't depend on choices of representatives. In other words, one needs to show that if $f_1\sim f_2$ and $g_1\sim g_2$, then $g_1\circ f_1\sim g_2\circ f_2$. Similarly, you also need to check that composition is associative "up to homotopy"! These are both really tedious exercises that I don't recommend.

[^chainchainchain]: Can you see why some people drop the word "chain"?

---

# Preview of derived categories

I want to close out this post with a few "preview" remarks on derived categories.

As mentioned previously, the quasi-isomorphisms are a key ingredient in defining the derived category. In particular, we are going to "formally invert" the quasi-isomorphisms. The idea is that we enlarge the collection of morphisms by adding inverses to quasi-isomorphisms. While this sounds simple, you have to take into account that you will also include all the new possible compositions of morphisms. In particular, defining the composition of morphisms in the derived category is a bit of a mess.

I also want to address a mistake I made in my last post. I said that the objects of $D(\mc A)$ were equivalence classes of chain complexes. This is not true! The objects of $D(\mc A)$ are in fact just chain complexes.

Well, that's all for now. See you next time!

---

Footnotes: